**COVID-19 Traffic Analysis**

A project completed for my master’s in data science degree.

**Introduction**

This project uses R to see how traffic patterns were affected by the COVID-19 Pandemic.

**Background**

The Covid-19 pandemic changed the way that many people interact with the world.   The pandemic disrupted lives, caused panic and altered daily routines.  Many predictions of habits for the future did not assume that a pandemic would occur as well.  Data science can be used to see how much things have changed, specifically with transportation.  People began working from home, were told to stay 6 feet apart from others and some lost their jobs and income.  Many less cars were on the road and people were not travelling as much.  I want to see how the pandemic affected transportation and whether people now travel mainly by car, if they have returned to using public transportation or have used other means.  This is an important topic as it can show if CO2 emissions have generally increased (and predict whether they will continue to increase) which can help influence various policies or actions that can be taken to decrease them.  Alternatively, it can show if emissions have declined that we can focus more on other areas of concern.  It also can show us how traffic patterns may have changed and if there will be more vehicles on the road than previously, which could lead to more areas needing maintenance.  Data science can help figure out trends in the data.

**Data**

For this project, I believe that US Census data will help me with my analysis (Bureau, 2024). One data set that I found at this link https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDT1Y2019.B08141?q=transportation%20in%20the%20united%20states%20in%202019 shows how many people drove a car, how many took public transportation or worked from home.  I decided to look at this data specifically in 2019 for the United States.  This data was collected on individuals that are 16 years of age and older.  According to an article on the site, the US Census Bureau collects information related to transportation in order to help with transportation planning, how to improve their roads and how to determine what may be needed in the future (Bureau, Commuting / journey to work 2024).  This specific set of data shows average values, so there is no concern with any missing data.  A pre-determined margin of error is also provided which can help with determining how accurate the results are.  I can also use a similar data set for 2020, 2021 (and other years) that shows how people commuted to work then at https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDT5Y2020.B08141?q=transportation%20in%20the%20united%20states%20in%202020 and also at https://data.census.gov/table/ACSDT1Y2021.B08141?q=transportation%20in%20the%20united%20states%20in%202021. 
	Another set of data that I found is from the U.S. Department of Transportation Bureau of Transportation Statistics and can be found at https://data.bts.gov/Research-and-Statistics/Transportation-Services-Index-and-Seasonally-Adjus/bw6n-ddqk/about_data. This is a large set of data published by the Bureau of Transportation Statistics created on March 21st 2017 and was most recently updated on October 10th 2024. This data set includes information on rail passenger miles, public transit ridership and more each month starting in 2000. There are 296 rows of data and 66 columns of data. The site that contains the data explains what the purpose of each column is within the data.  One peculiar thing about this data set is that it contains some columns with “seasonally-adjusted” data.  It is explained that the seasonally-adjusted data was altered by statisticians in order to more accurately make predictions and to control influences in the data including seasons and different numbers of weekends in a month.  
	Another data source is from https://data.ny.gov/Transportation/MTA-Daily-Ridership-Data-Beginning-2020/vxuj-8kew/about_data.  This data contains information on transportation numbers on various trains, subways and busses specifically in NY (including the LIRR) and shows numbers after the pandemic, specifically after March 1st 2020.  This will be give great insight as to how these have changed over time.  The source of this data can be found at https://new.mta.info/open-data.  The data is collected by the MTA to help keep transportation reliable, safe and fast.  There are 1699 rows of data in this set and 15 columns.  The data set was created on March 14th 2022 and is updated daily. Although this data set is in a specific area of the US, it can still show how ridership has changed over the years for subways, buses and trains.  Something different about this data set is that it also provides a comparison to values from prior to the pandemic.  With this extra information, I can compare the percentage numbers to truly understand how much transportation changed since the pandemic and whether it has returned to prior levels. 
	
**Tools used for this project and required packages:**

For this project I will use ggplot2 to help create plots to help discover if the data is normal and to also help identify any outliers in the data that might be affecting the results. I will also use dplyr to help filter the data to my needs and to clean it up.   I also may need to use the purrr package to help remove any “NA” values in my data sets however most of them do not seem to have any missing values. 
	
